#### Working papers

**Towards Equitable Care Access: The Impact of Telehealth Adoption in Safety-Net Community Health Centers**

(with Xiao Liu, Tan Lekwijit, and Pei-yu Chen)

Abstract: Although telehealth’s impact has been studied in general populations, little is known about its effects on underserved populations, who face higher barriers to accessing in-person and telehealth services. To address this gap, we focus on underserved communities in the United States and examine the effectiveness of telehealth in enhancing healthcare access and process quality for patients served by safety-net Community Health Centers (CHCs). Specifically, we study (1) how the implementation of mental telehealth in CHCs affects healthcare access and process quality, (2) how this effect differs between two telehealth models: the *specialist-facilitated telehealth model*, which addresses the access barrier to specialists, and the *remote telehealth model*, which addresses the distance barrier to care, and (3) how the efficacy of these delivery models differs with area characteristics. Our analysis reveals that mental telehealth adoption enhances healthcare access among underserved patients, driven primarily by the specialist-facilitated model. On the other hand, the remote model does not significantly improve access, revealing the significance of technology and skill barriers in preventing marginalized patients from accessing care from their locations. We further observe that the effectiveness of the two models varies across areas with differing levels of specialist availability and internet access. Additionally, we find that the remote telehealth model contributes to enhancements in process quality measures within CHCs. Our findings provide evidence that telehealth can improve healthcare access among vulnerable populations but also highlight barriers that need to be addressed to realize telehealth’s full potential in reducing health disparities. These findings provide important policy implications regarding telehealth deployment strategies. 

