---
layout: single
title: Instrumental variable 
category: Notes
---



# Instrumental Variable Methods

Many studies aim to identify the causal impact of treatments or interventions on various outcomes. However, executing a fully randomized experiment is often unfeasible for ethical or practical reasons, leading researchers to rely on observational studies. A primary concern in these studies is the presence of unmeasured confounding, which can compromise their validity. Variables like lab test results, clinical data, lifestyle factors, and assessments of cognitive and physical abilities are often missing from secondary databases, posing a substantial risk of bias, particularly in studies examining intended effects where a strong correlation exists between treatment decisions and outcomes.

Approaches such as propensity score analysis, regression, and matching are employed to mitigate the influence of confounders on causal effect estimates, but they only address confounders that are measurable. To adjust for those that are unmeasured, the instrumental variable (IV) method can be utilized.

## What is a valid instrument?
Informally, an Instrumental Variable (IV) is one that predicts the treatment under study but is unrelated to the outcome of the study except through its effect on the treatment. Formally, a variable must exhibit three key characteristics to qualify as an IV: (1) relevance, meaning that the IV must cause a change in the treatment received; (2) effective random assignment, signifying that the IV must be as if randomly assigned, independent of unmeasured confounders when conditioned on covariates; and (3) exclusion restriction, implying that the IV should not directly affect the outcomes.


## Monotonicity assummption and compliance classes
The three basic assumptions above allow for identification of an upper and lower bound of the causal effect [^1]. Unfortunately, these bounds will typically be wide. The wide bounds underscores the uncertainty related to estimating the causal effect. Moreover, they show how much information that needs to be provided by a fourth assumption in order to obtain a point estimate. The fourth identifying assumption is monotonicity. This assumption states that the instrument affects the treatment assignment in a consistent direction for all individuals in the population. More formally, it posits that there are no individuals for whom the instrument would induce the opposite behavior in terms of treatment compliance. 

For simplicity, let's discuss IV estimation for a binary IV ($$Z=\{0, 1\}$$) and binary treatment ($$D=\{0, 1\}$$). A subject in a study with binary IV and treatment can be classified into one of four latent compliance classes based on the joint values of potential treatment received[^2]. The four compliance classes are referred to as compliers, never-takers, always-takers, and defiers. Compliers refer to indivudlas who adhere to the treatment assignment (i.e., they are assigned to the treatment group and adhere to the treatment). Never-takers are individuals who never take the treatment regardless of their assignment to the treatment group. Always-takers are individuals who always take the treatment regardless of not being assigned to the treatment group. Defiers are individuals who do the opposite of the assignment.

Let $$D^z$$ be the $$N$$-dimensional vector of potential treatment under IV assignment $$z$$ with elements $$D^z_i, \ i=1,...,N, \ D^z_i=1$$ or $$0$$ according to whether person $$i$$ would receive treatment level $$1$$ or $$0$$ under IV assignment $$z$$. In other words, $$D^0_i$$ means $$i$$ has $$z=0$$ and $$D^1_i$$ means $$i$$ has $$z=1$$. 

$$D^0_i=0$$ means that the individual $$i$$ did not receive the treatment under the condition that they were not assigned to the treatment group, while $$D^0_i=1$$ indicates that they received treatment. On the other hand, $$D^1_i=0$$ means that the individual $$i$$ did not receive the treatment under the condition that they were assigned to the treatment group, while $$D^1_i=1$$ indicates that they received treatment. The four compliance classes can each be represented as follows:

Compliance class | Notation 
---- | ---- |
Compliers | $$(D^0_i,D^1_i)=(0,1)$$ 
Never-takers | $$(D^0_i,D^1_i)=(0,0)$$ 
Always-takers | $$(D^0_i,D^1_i)=(1,1)$$
Defiers | $$(D^0_i,D^1_i)=(1,0)$$ 

Understanding these compliance classes is important for several reasons. First, it helps understand the **Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE)**. IV analysis often focuses on estimating the LATE, which is the average treatment effect for the compliers. Identifying compliers help isolate the causal effect of the treatment on this specific group, providing a more precise estimate than the overall average treatment effect (ATE), which might be biased due to the presence of never-takers, always-takers, and defiers. 
Compliance classes are essential in IV analysis because they help to categorize individuals based on their adherence to the treatment assignment. This categorization allows for a more accurate estimation of causal effects.


[^1]: Hernán MA, Robins JM. Instruments for causal inference: an epidemiologist’s dream? Epidemiology. 2006;17:360–7
[^2]: Angrist J, Imbens G, Rubin D. Identification of causal effects using instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association 1996; 91(434):444–455.
