---
layout: single
title: Propensity Score Matching - Achieving Balance in Non-Randomized Studies
category: Notes
---



> (Will have to add STATA codes and simulation. Edit inline equations. Add images.)

# Propensity Score Matching

In empirical research, it is essential to ensure that the groups under comparison are equivalent, thus avoiding comparisons of fundamentally different entities. For instance, if a study aims to evaluate the effectiveness of a new medication by comparing the health outcomes of patients who chose to enroll in the experiment versus those who did not, the analysis may be biased. The patients who enroll might be more sick or motivated to seek treatment, skewing the results. As such, observational studies frequently face challenges because the baseline characteristics between the treated and untreated groups can differ significantly, limiting the ability to conduct a robust comparison.

Randomization serves as the most effective way to achieve inter-group comparability and to balance covariates between groups. However, randomization is not always possible due to ethical concerns and high costs.

Propensity score analysis is an effective method for controlling confounders, allowing researchers to balance the backgrounds of patients across various potential risk factors. This method was first introduced by Rosenbaum and Rubin in 1983 (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983)[^1].



## Estimating propensity scores
Propensity score is defined as the probability of each individual being assigned to the treatment group. Among patients with the same propensity score, the distribution of measured baseline covariates is expected to be similar, thereby facilitating a fair comparison between the treatment and control groups.

Propensity scores are typically calculated using a multivariable logistic regression model in which the treatment status is modeled in relation to potential confounders. The choice of variables to include in constructing the propensity score model is subject to debate (e.g., whether to include all those covariates related to the outcome, those related to the treatment assignment, or both) (Millimet and Tchernis 2009)[^2]. However, including all available covariates is the simplest approach that meets the criteria for ignorable treatment assignment and emulates a randomized controlled trial by eliminating all sources of bias between the groups (Rubin and Thomas 1996)[^3]. 


## Implementation of propensity score matching


### 1:1 or 1:n matching
One-to-one matching, where each treated patient is paired with an  untreated patient having a similar propensity score, is the most frequently used method. However, if the number of control group patients significantly exceeds that of the treated group, a 1:n matching approach can be used. This technique pairs each treated patient with multiple untreated patients, all of whom have similar propensity scores.

### With or without replacement
Matching can be conducted “with replacement” or “without replacement”. Matching with replacement is utilized when there is a limited number of control subjects available. Typically, propensity score matching is performed without replacement.

### Nearest neighbor matching and optimal matching
Matching algorithms are typically categorized into two types: nearest neighbor matching and optimal matching. Nearest neighbor matching involves selecting a patient at random from the treatment group and pairing them with a patient in the control group who has the closest propensity score. This approach pairs patients based on the nearest available match without consideration for the overall quality of all possible matches.

Optimal matching, on the other hand, aims to minimize the total difference in propensity scores across all pairs within the study. This method considers the entire set of possible matches to find the configuration that results in the smallest cumulative difference, enhancing the balance between groups.

Typically, nearest neighbor matching with a caliper set to 0.2 or 0.25 of the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score (without replacement) is used frequently. Employing a narrower caliper helps to ensure that matched pairs are more similar, reducing the risk of poor matches.


## Evaluating propensity score distribution
After matching subjects based on their propensity scores, it is important to assess the distribution of these scores among the matched subjects from both the treated and control groups. This comparison is essential to verify that the matching process has successfully balanced the groups concerning the covariates that were used to compute the propensity scores.

When there is significant disparity or minimal overlap in the distribution of these scores, it indicates substantial differences in the baseline characteristics of the groups.

To evaluate the distribution of propensity scores, the standardized mean difference is a useful metric. It allows for the comparison of means for both continuous and binary variables between the treatment and control groups, providing a clear measure of balance achieved through the matching process.

For a continuous covariate, the standardized difference is defined as:
$\frac{M_t - M_c}{\sqrt{\frac{V_t + V_c}{2}}}$

where $M_t$ and $M_c$ represent the means of the covariate for the treated and control groups, respectively, and $V_t$ and $V_c$ denote the variances of the covariate in these groups.

For binary variables, the standardized difference is defined as:
$$\frac{P_t - P_c}{\sqrt{\frac{P_t(1-P_t) + P_c(1-P_c)}{2}}}$$

where $P_t$ and $P_c$ represents the proportions of the dichotomous variable in the treated and control groups, respectively. 

Unlike other hypothesis-testing statistics, the standardized difference is unaffected by sample size. This characteristic makes the standard difference useful for comparing the balance of measured variables between treated and untreated subjects in both matched and unmatched samples. A standardized difference less than 0.1 indicates a negligible difference in the mean or proportion of a covariate between the treatment and control groups (Ho, Imai, King, and Stuart 2007)[^4].

Although it is standard practice to report a summary of baseline characteristics across groups (Moher, Schulz, and Altman 2001)[^5], reliance on $p$ values from t-tests or chi-square tests to assess the balance of covariates can be misleading. This is because the failure to reject the null hypothesis does not conclusively indicate a successful balance of covariates between the groups. 

[^1]: Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70(1), 41-55.
[^2]: Millimet, D. L., & Tchernis, R. (2009). On the specification of propensity scores, with applications to the analysis of trade policies. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 27(3), 397-415.
[^3]: Rubin, D. B., & Thomas, N. (1996). Matching using estimated propensity scores: relating theory to practice. Biometrics, 249-264.
[^4]: Ho, D. E., Imai, K., King, G., & Stuart, E. A. (2007). Matching as nonparametric preprocessing for reducing model dependence in parametric causal inference. Political analysis, 15(3), 199-236.
[^5]: Moher, D., Schulz, K. F., & Altman, D. G. (2001). The CONSORT statement: revised recommendations for improving the quality of reports of parallel-group randomised trials. The lancet, 357(9263), 1191-1194.
